OpenAI and Anthropic are growing about as fast as, or faster than any company of their size has grown in history. It’s extremely rare for a tech company making more than $1 billion to be growing over 100% per year.

In fact, both labs are way above that threshold. OpenAI tripled its revenue run rate (recent revenue extrapolated to an annual rate) in the past year, from $13 billion last August to over $40 billion now. Anthropic grew its revenue from $1 billion to $9 billion in 2025, and its growth rate accelerated from there: Anthropic more than tripled its run rate in just the first quarter of 2026. Reportedly, it reached $65 billion by the end of July.

Now, some of these eye-popping Anthropic growth rates should be taken with a caveat: Anthropic was coming from behind and overtaking its initially larger rival, OpenAI. To factor this out, we might look at Anthropic and OpenAI combined. Their growth rates have been both extremely rapid and remarkably robust since 2023: together, they tripled in 2024, and then grew more than fourfold in 2025. And this year they’ve already grown by 3.5×, from $30B to $105B combined, and it’s only August! Remember: the 2025 growth rates were already record-breaking, and now these labs are growing faster from a higher baseline.

A priori, it’s natural to think that 3× or 4× annual growth of an industry the scale of frontier AI today is just unsustainable. Perhaps LLMs are seeing rapid technical progress and rapid diffusion because these technologies are so new. But as these companies grow, especially when they approach the size of the largest firms in the world today with hundreds of billions in annual revenue, this growth will slow. The frontier labs will run out of technical low-hanging fruit, their models and products will mature, and the adoption curves will saturate. Revenue growth rates will slow down, from 3× per year to 2×, then 50% per year, then 20-30% per year (a la mature tech giants in recent years).

The answer partly depends on whether revenue growth comes from progress or diffusion. Progress continues as long as progress continues. Diffusion meanwhile slows significantly after a few years. Obviously, both have played a key role in the revenue growth of the last four years. But it matters whether each new level of capabilities creates its own diffusion curve, which suggests each step up leads to further revenue growth, or whether frontier AI in general just saturates.

Note that the two companies use different revenue accounting standards. When people buy tokens through cloud platforms, OpenAI books only the cut it receives from the cloud provider, while Anthropic books the full cost, which inflates Anthropic’s reported revenue relative to OpenAI’s.

The growth rate within 2026 may be slowing down. For example, the two labs were reportedly around $55B combined at the end of Q1, nearly doubling in the first quarter, but took around four months to double again (still a faster doubling time than in 2025). There’s enough uncertainty in the exact dates and revenue figures around each of these reports (more details here) that these calculations shouldn’t be taken literally.

Anthropic’s infrastructure buildout provides a useful test case. In November 2025, when Anthropic had less than $9 billion in annualized revenue, the company announced plans to invest $50 billion in American compute infrastructure. Subsequent disclosures allow us to identify nearly $50 billion of debt financing associated with the buildout. Much of this financing was assembled in early 2026 before Anthropic’s revenue spiked, making it a good test of investors’ willingness to lend against AI companies’ future revenue growth.

Banks, insurers, and private-credit funds manage large pools of institutional capital that seek relatively predictable returns. A long-term commitment to lease computing systems or datacenter capacity creates a promise of payments that can incentivize those funders to provide debt while the underlying TPU racks and completed facilities provide collateral. This allows outside investors to pay for infrastructure upfront and be repaid over time.

Broadcom and Google help bridge this gap. Both companies benefit commercially as more TPU systems are deployed, and both have longer operating histories and more diversified sources of cash flow than Anthropic. Investors therefore have more evidence that they can honor their commitments through changing business conditions. By agreeing to absorb part of the losses if Anthropic or Fluidstack stops paying, Broadcom and Google can make the debt cheaper and more attractive to a wider range of investors without supplying the money themselves. This is vendor-supported financing: Suppliers use their credit to help finance deployments from which they benefit.

The debt is divided into three tranches, or groups of investors with different claims on the vehicle’s payments and assets. If the equipment company suffers losses, the $6 billion A1 and $24 billion A2 tranches are repaid before the $4.5 billion B tranche. This makes A1 and A2 senior debt and B junior debt. The A1 tranche pays 1 percentage point above Treasury yields, A2 pays 5.75%, and B pays 8.5%.

The contrast between A2 and B makes the economic effect visible. Investors supplied $4.5 billion without Broadcom’s support, but required an 8.5% interest rate, compared with 5.75% for A2. The 2.75-percentage-point difference reflects two protections at once: A2 is supported by Broadcom and is repaid before B. The comparison is therefore an upper bound on how much Broadcom’s backstop is worth to the investors, rather than a precise estimate.

Unlike the compute financing, Lake Mariner does not contain an otherwise comparable tranche without Google’s support, so I cannot isolate precisely how much the backstop reduced the interest rate. The $3.2 billion of debt nevertheless pays 7.75%, suggesting that investors are still pricing meaningful risks. I think these include the possibility of construction delays and the conditions and limits attached to Google’s support. TeraWulf’s completion commitment and Google’s backstop address different parts of the transaction: One helps ensure that the facilities are delivered, while the other makes the rent more dependable once the leases begin.

At least in the near term, financing is unlikely to be the binding constraint on frontier compute growth. Nearly $50 billion of debt has been raised for an infrastructure program announced when Anthropic had less than $9 billion in annualized revenue. Anthropic did not need to raise the full cost of the buildout, and it’s unlikely other AI companies will either.

One way closed-weight developers could capture this value is if the open- vs. closed-weight capabilities gap is somehow larger than it seems — perhaps because open-weight model developers optimize their more limited resources to a few central domains, like coding, while neglecting a long tail of domains that are highly economically valuable. An extreme case of this is “benchmaxxing”, where developers prioritize achieving high benchmark scores even while their models lag at the capabilities those benchmarks are intended to measure.

One possibility is that AI companies work hard to make sure every model release shows improvements in a wide range of domains, but that this work is fairly independent from domain to domain. For instance, the work could consist of procuring training data for each domain. If so, there’s no deeper explanation for why benchmark scores go up all at once.

But there could be a deeper explanation: some underlying factor of general capability, akin to IQ in humans. If so, how might we interpret this factor? There may be no definitive answer, though some connections are notable: before it saturated, (the log of) METR’s Time Horizons measurement was highly correlated with ECI. Or, perhaps ECI gains are driven in large part by the maximal context length over which AI systems can sustain coherent reasoning.

Related to the concept of continual learning, this asks whether AI can improve at a task through repeated attempts — typically only by managing its context, not by updating its weights. The implications are significant: pre-deployment testing fails to bound capabilities if AI can improve on the fly, whether at economically valuable tasks or dangerous ones.

A relative of the previous question, this asks whether AI systems can accomplish any task if they think long enough. It’s vexing that we aren’t quite sure. Experiments tend to show logarithmic gains at best, so the requisite scale may be impractical for many tasks. But a capability that “merely” costs an impractical amount of tokens may soon be within reach, e.g. due to falling inference costs or additional training.

Experts were asked when they believe there is a 50% chance that human-level AI exists. Human-level AI was defined as unaided machines being able to accomplish every task better and more cheaply than human workers. More information about the study can be found in the fold-out box at the end of this text.

Each vertical line in this chart represents the answer of one expert. The fact that there are such large differences in answers makes it clear that experts do not agree on how long it will take until such a system might be developed. A few believe that this level of technology will never be developed. Some think that it’s possible, but it will take a long time. And many believe that it will be developed within the next few decades.

Expert surveys are one piece of information to consider when we think about the future of AI, but we should not overstate the results of these surveys. Experts in a particular technology are not necessarily experts in making predictions about the future of that technology.

Experts in many fields do not have a good track record in making forecasts about their own field, as researchers including Barbara Mellers, Phil Tetlock, and others have shown. The history of flight includes a striking example of such failure. Wilbur Wright is quoted as saying, "I confess that in 1901, I said to my brother Orville that man would not fly for 50 years." Two years later, ‘man’ was not only flying, but it was these very men who achieved the feat.

There is no consensus, and the uncertainty is high. There is huge disagreement between experts about when human-level AI will be developed. Some believe that it is decades away, while others think it is probable that such systems will be developed within the next few years or months.There is not just disagreement between experts; individual experts also emphasize the large uncertainty around their own individual estimate. As always when the uncertainty is high, it is important to stress that it cuts both ways. It might be very long until we see human-level AI, but it also means that we might have little time to prepare.

Several studies have shown that the framing affects respondents’ timelines, with the fixed-years framing leading to longer timelines (i.e., that HLMI is further in the future). For example, in the previous edition of this survey (which asked identical questions), respondents who got the fixed-years framing gave a 50% chance of HLMI by 2068; those who got fixed-probability gave the year 2054.14 The framing results from the 2022 edition of the survey have not yet been published.

In addition to this framing effect, there is a larger effect driven by how the concept of HLMI is defined. We can see this in the results from the previous edition of this survey (the result from the 2022 survey hasn’t yet been published). For respondents who were given the HLMI definition above, the average forecast for a 50% chance of HLMI was 2061. A small subset of respondents was instead given another, logically similar question that asked about the full automation of labor; their average forecast for a 50% probability was 2138, a full 77 years later than the first group.

A total of 4,271 AI experts were contacted; 738 responded (a 17% rate), of which 356 provided complete answers to the human-level AI question.

It’s possible that the respondents were not representative of all the AI experts contacted — that is, that there was “sample bias.” There is not enough data to rule out all potential sources of sample bias. After all, we don’t know what the people who didn’t respond to the survey, or others who weren’t even contacted, believe about AI.

But AI systems can also cause unintended harm when they act differently than intended or fail. For example, in the Netherlands, the authorities used an AI system that falsely claimed that an estimated 26,000 parents made fraudulent claims for childcare benefits. The false allegations led to hardship for many poor families and eventually resulted in the resignation of the Dutch government in 2021.13

Currently, almost all resources that are dedicated to AI aim to speed up the development of this technology. Efforts that aim to increase the safety of AI systems, on the other hand, do not receive the resources they need. Researcher Toby Ord estimated that in 2020 between $10 to $50 million was spent on work to address the alignment problem. Corporate AI investment in the same year was more than 2000-times larger, it summed up to $153 billion.

The training computation is plotted on a logarithmic scale so that from each grid line to the next, it shows a 100-fold increase. This long-run perspective shows a continuous increase. For the first six decades, training computation increased in line with Moore’s Law, doubling roughly every 20 months. Since about 2010, this exponential growth has sped up further, to a doubling time of just about six months. That is an astonishingly fast rate of growth.

The training computation of PaLM, developed in 2022, was 2,700,000,000 petaFLOP. The training computation of AlexNet, the AI with the largest training computation up to 2012, was 470 petaFLOP. 2,500,000,000 petaFLOP / 470 petaFLOP = 5,319,148.9. At the same time, the amount of training computation required to achieve a given performance has been falling exponentially.

The costs have also increased quickly. The cost to train PaLM is estimated to be $9–$23 million, according to Lennart Heim, a researcher in the Epoch AI team. See Lennart Heim (2022) — Estimating PaLM's training cost.

Are you exaggerating what your AI product can do? Or even claiming it can do something beyond the current capability of any AI or automated technology? For example, we’re not yet living in the realm of science fiction, where computers can generally make trustworthy predictions of human behavior. Your performance claims would be deceptive if they lack scientific support or if they apply only to certain types of users or under certain conditions.

Are you promising that your AI product does something better than a non-AI product? It’s not uncommon for advertisers to say that some new-fangled technology makes their product better – perhaps to justify a higher price or influence labor decisions. You need adequate proof for that kind of comparative claim, too, and if such proof is impossible to get, then don’t make the claim.

Are you aware of the risks? You need to know about the reasonably foreseeable risks and impact of your AI product before putting it on the market. If something goes wrong – maybe it fails or yields biased results – you can’t just blame a third-party developer of the technology. And you can’t say you’re not responsible because that technology is a “black box” you can’t understand or didn’t know how to test.

Does the product actually use AI at all? If you think you can get away with baseless claims that your product is AI-enabled, think again. In an investigation, FTC technologists and others can look under the hood and analyze other materials to see if what’s inside matches up with your claims. Before labeling your product as AI-powered, note also that merely using an AI tool in the development process is not the same as a product having AI in it.

This message is not new. Advertisers should take another look at our earlier AI guidance, which focused on fairness and equity but also said, clearly, not to overpromise what your algorithm or AI-based tool can deliver. Whatever it can or can’t do, AI is important, and so are the claims you make about it. You don’t need a machine to predict what the FTC might do when those claims are unsupported.

As for the new wave of generative AI tools, firms are starting to use them in ways that can influence people’s beliefs, emotions, and behavior. Such uses are expanding rapidly and include chatbots designed to provide information, advice, support, and companionship. Many of these chatbots are effectively built to persuade and are designed to answer queries in confident language even when those answers are fictional. A tendency to trust the output of these tools also comes in part from “automation bias,” whereby people may be unduly trusting of answers from machines which may seem neutral or impartial. It also comes from the effect of anthropomorphism, which may lead people to trust chatbots more when designed, say, to use personal pronouns and emojis. People could easily be led to think that they’re conversing with something that understands them and is on their side.

Only 3.8% of businesses reported using AI to produce goods and services, according to the most recent Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS) but it is more widely used in certain industries such as information and tech sectors.

While it may seem like AI is everywhere, BTOS shows the opposite. Based on survey responses, only an estimated 3.9% of businesses used AI to produce goods or services between Oct. 23 and Nov. 5, 2023. However, this usage varied widely among economic sectors (Figure 1).

The BTOS AI findings are largely consistent with those of the 2019 Annual Business Survey (ABS), which found 3.2% of U.S. businesses used AI in 2018.

In part because the datasets used to train an AI are far too large for people to successfully monitor and filter, there is no foolproof way as yet to protect AI from misdirection. To assist the developer community, the new report offers an overview of the sorts of attacks its AI products might suffer and corresponding approaches to reduce the damage.

Evasion attacks, which occur after an AI system is deployed, attempt to alter an input to change how the system responds to it. Examples would include adding markings to stop signs to make an autonomous vehicle misinterpret them as speed limit signs or creating confusing lane markings to make the vehicle veer off the road.

Poisoning attacks occur in the training phase by introducing corrupted data. An example would be slipping numerous instances of inappropriate language into conversation records, so that a chatbot interprets these instances as common enough parlance to use in its own customer interactions.

“Most of these attacks are fairly easy to mount and require minimum knowledge of the AI system and limited adversarial capabilities,” said co-author Alina Oprea, a professor at Northeastern University. “Poisoning attacks, for example, can be mounted by controlling a few dozen training samples, which would be a very small percentage of the entire training set.”

“Despite the significant progress AI and machine learning have made, these technologies are vulnerable to attacks that can cause spectacular failures with dire consequences,” he said. “There are theoretical problems with securing AI algorithms that simply haven’t been solved yet. If anyone says differently, they are selling snake oil.”

Bias in AI can harm humans. AI can make decisions that affect whether a person is admitted into a school, authorized for a bank loan or accepted as a rental applicant. It is relatively common knowledge that AI systems can exhibit biases that stem from their programming and data sources; for example, machine learning software could be trained on a dataset that underrepresents a particular gender or ethnic group. The revised NIST publication acknowledges that while these computational and statistical sources of bias remain highly important, they do not represent the full picture.

As it was later revealed, Mr. Schwartz had used ChatGPT, which fabricated the cited cases. Mr. Schwartz testified at the sanctions hearing that when he reviewed the reply memo, he was “operating under the false perception that this website [i.e., ChatGPT] could not possibly be fabricating cases on its own.” (Tr. at 31.) He stated, “I just was not thinking that the case could be fabricated, so I was not looking at it from that point of view.” (Tr. at 35.) “My reaction was, ChatGPT is finding that case somewhere. Maybe it’s unpublished. Maybe it was appealed. Maybe access is difficult to get. I just never thought it could be made up.” (Tr. at 33.)

The “Varghese” decision bears the docket number 18-13694, which is associated with the case George Cornea v. U.S. Attorney General, et al. The Federal Reporter citation for “Varghese” is associated with J.D. v Azar, 925 F.3d 1291 (D.C. Cir. 2019).

The “Miller” decision does not exist. Second Circuit docket number 98-7926 is associated with the case Vitale v. First Fidelity, which was assigned to a panel consisting of Judges Richard Cardamone, Amalya Kearse and Chester Straub. The Federal Reporter citation for “Miller” is to Greenleaf v. Garlock, Inc., 174 F.3d 352 (3d Cir. 1999).

Respondents have now acknowledged that the “Varghese”, “Miller”, “Petersen”, “Shaboon”, “Martinez” and “Durden” decisions were generated by ChatGPT and do not exist. (See, e.g., ECF 32, 32-1.)

Mr. Schwartz has endeavored to explain why he turned to ChatGPT for legal research. The Levidow Firm primarily practices in New York state courts. (Schwartz June 6 Decl. ¶ 10; Tr. 45.) It uses a legal research service called Fastcase and does not maintain Westlaw or LexisNexis accounts. (Tr. 22-23.) When Mr. Schwartz began to research the Montreal Convention, the firm’s Fastcase account had limited access to federal cases. (Schwartz June 6 Decl. ¶ 12; Tr. 24.) “And it had occurred to me that I heard about this new site which I assumed -- I falsely assumed was like a super search engine called ChatGPT, and that’s what I used.” (Tr. 24; see also Schwartz June 6 Decl. ¶ 15.) Mr. Schwartz had not previously used ChatGPT and became aware of it through press reports and conversations with family members. (Schwartz June 6 Decl. ¶ 14.)

At the time that he prepared the Affirmation in Opposition, Mr. Schwartz did not have the full text of any “decision” generated by ChatGPT. (Tr. 27.) He cited and quoted only from excerpts generated by the chatbot. (Tr. 27.)

The Schwartz Affidavit of May 25 included screenshots taken from a smartphone in which Mr. Schwartz questioned ChatGPT about the reliability of its work (e.g., “Is Varghese a real case” and “Are the other cases you provided fake”). (ECF 32-1.) ChatGPT responded that it had supplied “real” authorities that could be found through Westlaw, LexisNexis and the Federal Reporter. (Id.) The screenshots are annexed as Appendix B to this Opinion and Order.

The Court has described Respondents’ submission of fake cases as an unprecedented circumstance. (ECF 31 at 1.) A fake opinion is not “existing law” and citation to a fake opinion does not provide a non-frivolous ground for extending, modifying, or reversing existing law, or for establishing new law. An attempt to persuade a court or oppose an adversary by relying on fake opinions is an abuse of the adversary system. Salovaara, 222 F.3d at 34.

Mr. LoDuca violated Rule 11 in swearing to the truth of the April 25 Affidavit with no basis for doing so. While an inadequate inquiry may not suggest bad faith, the absence of any inquiry supports a finding of bad faith. Mr. Schwartz walked into his office, presented him with an affidavit that he had never seen in draft form, and Mr. LoDuca read it and signed it under oath. A cursory review of his own affidavit would have revealed that (1) “Zicherman v. Korean Air Lines Co., Ltd., 516 F.3d 1237 (11th Cir. 2008)” could not be found, (2) many of the cases were excerpts and not full cases and (3) reading only the opening passages of, for example, “Varghese”, would have revealed that it was internally inconsistent and nonsensical.

In theory, AI systems could someday allow users to exert so much control over how their expression is reflected in an output that the system’s contribution would become rote or mechanical. The evidence as to the operation of today’s AI systems indicates that this is not currently the case. Prompts do not appear to adequately determine the expressive elements produced, or control how the system translates them into an output.

The gaps between prompts and resulting outputs demonstrate that the user lacks control over the conversion of their ideas into fixed expression, and the system is largely responsible for determining the expressive elements in the output. In other words, prompts may reflect a user’s mental conception or idea, but they do not control the way that idea is expressed. This is even clearer in the case of generative AI systems that modify or rewrite prompts internally. That process recasts the human contribution—however detailed it may be—into a different form.

This prompt describes the subject matter of the desired output, the setting for the scene, the style of the image, and placement of the main subject. The resulting image reflects some of these instructions (e.g., a bespectacled cat smoking a pipe), but not others (e.g., a highly detailed wood environment). Where no instructions were provided, the AI system filled in the gaps.

Unlike prompts alone, these tools can enable the user to control the selection and placement of individual creative elements. Whether such modifications rise to the minimum standard of originality required under Feist will depend on a case-by-case determination. In those cases where they do, the output should be copyrightable. Similarly, the inclusion of elements of AI-generated content in a larger human-authored work does not affect the copyrightability of the larger human-authored work as a whole. For example, a film that includes AI-generated special effects or background artwork is copyrightable, even if the AI effects and artwork separately are not.

FMs have also been getting larger. One of the first FMs released was BERT in 2018 which had 354 million trainable parameters (values that encode the knowledge of the model). Since then, models such as PaLM, GPT-3, and Megatron-Turing NLG have been developed with hundreds of billions of parameters, and popular open-source models have in the range of tens of billions of parameters.

Larger models currently tend to do better but cost more to develop and use, particularly in relation to computing costs. Meta’s FM ‘LLaMA’ has 65 billion parameters and an estimated compute cost of $4 million. In contrast, the larger FM ‘Megatron-Turing NLG’ with 530 billion parameters has an estimated compute cost of $100 million. As a consequence, without significant investment, smaller FM developers are unlikely to be able to finance the computing costs required to train the largest models.

We considered whether synthetic data – data that is artificially generated (including by other FMs) rather than collected based on real-world events – could be used as a substitute to drive future improvements and provide FM developers with access to cheaper training data. We heard that there is a risk that the use of synthetic data generated by FMs for training future models could result in the irreversible degradation of their performance, a phenomenon referred to as ‘model collapse’. There is ongoing research in this area, but we note that there is still considerable uncertainty about the extent to which synthetic data can be a viable data source for FM developers that could be a complete alternative to real-world and increasingly proprietary data.

There is ongoing research into new FM architecture and design to identify whether there are more efficient ways to develop models that require fewer resources, like computing power. It remains unclear whether, as that research develops, models will become cutting-edge but on a smaller scale. However, if the trend towards ever larger models, with an increasing amount of computing power required to run them, continues it is possible that only the largest, well-resourced, firms or those with existing partnerships with computing firms will be able to develop competitive FMs. The market is more likely to sustain a range of FMs, building models that are both at the frontier of new capabilities as well as performing routine tasks, if all FM developers can access computing power on fair commercial terms, without undue restrictions.

Currently, FM-generated outputs can be false and misleading, due to the tendency for the models to ‘hallucinate’ – to produce convincing, but incorrect outputs. This issue has deep technical root causes and is not easily solved. Although some progress is being made, we heard during our review that it is unlikely that we will reach a point where hallucinations are eradicated altogether. If that is the case, businesses will need to carefully consider the impact of any false and misleading information on consumers’ decision making and take steps to ensure they are sufficiently protected.

Far more data is released to proprietary model providers. Chatbot Arena is a community-driven leaderboard that benefits from free, crowdsourced feedback provided by everyday users. However, proprietary model providers collect significantly more test prompts and model battle outcomes than others. Google and OpenAI have received an estimated 19.2% and 20.4% of all test prompts on the arena, respectively. We estimate this based on the share of total battles played by the models of different providers on the Arena (as shown in Figure 4). In contrast, a combined 41 fully open-source models have only received an estimated 8.9% of the total data, collectively.

Chatbot Arena data access drives significant performance gains. The differences in data access between providers matter; we estimate that by training on Chatbot Arena data, model ranking can be improved significantly. In a controlled experimental setting, we observe that increasing the arena training data proportion from (0% → 70%) more than doubles the win-rates from 23.5% to 49.9% on ArenaHard (Li et al., 2024c). We believe this is a conservative estimate, as a subset of providers have disproportionate access to private API data, which, if used, can potentially yield even greater performance gains.

Notably, we found that no private models were tested by academic labs during the observed period. This leads us to believe only certain providers were made aware they could submit multiple private variants, as we observe clear differences in the number and frequency of private testing among providers.

Private testing coupled with the option to retract enables a best-of-N strategy, where an organization submits multiple model variants to Chatbot Arena, privately evaluates them, and retains only the top-performing variant to be publicly published on the leaderboard. In this section, we show that best-of-N submissions violate the BT unbiased sampling assumption. This systematically inflates model rankings and distorts the leaderboard ranking.

Realistic estimate of benefits of multiple submissions. In practice, a provider would likely optimize the differences in the variants they are testing to maximize the signal from the Arena users. To study this scenario, we compare two different variants of Aya-Vision-32B. The two checkpoints are variants of the same model, with each showing slightly better performance on different subsets of benchmarks. In Figure 9, we illustrate the extreme ends of the scores obtained by the two models (1097 (±29/25) vs. 1059 (±18/23)), with 9 models falling in between both variants on the leaderboard.

Model collapse is a degenerative process affecting generations of learned generative models, in which the data they generate end up polluting the training set of the next generation. Being trained on polluted data, they then mis-perceive reality. The process is depicted in Fig. 1a. We separate two special cases: early model collapse and late model collapse. In early model collapse, the model begins losing information about the tails of the distribution; in late model collapse, the model converges to a distribution that carries little resemblance to the original one, often with substantially reduced variance.

Five epochs, no original training data. Here the model is trained for five epochs starting on the original dataset but with no original data retained for subsequent runs. The overall original task performance is presented in Fig. 1b. We find that training with generated data allows us to adapt to the underlying task, losing some performance, from 20 to 28 perplexity points.

Ten epochs, 10% of original training data preserved. Here the model is trained for ten epochs on the original dataset and with every new generation of training, a random 10% of the original data points is sampled. The overall original task performance is presented in Fig. 1c. We find that preservation of the original data allows for better model fine-tuning and leads to only minor degradation of performance.

To be accountable, relevant actors must be able to assure others that the AI systems they are developing or deploying are worthy of trust, and face consequences when they are not. The RFC relied on the NIST delineation of “trustworthy AI” attributes: valid and reliable, safe, secure and resilient, privacy-enhanced, explainable and interpretable, accountable and transparent, and fair with harmful bias managed. To be clear, trust and assurance are not products that AI actors generate. Rather, trustworthiness involves a dynamic between parties; it is in part a function of how well those who use or are affected by AI systems can interrogate those systems and make determinations about them, either themselves or through proxies.

Over 1,440 unique comments from diverse stakeholders were submitted in response to the RFC and have been posted to Regulations.gov. An NTIA employee read every comment. Approximately 1,250 of the comments were submitted by individuals in their own capacity. Approximately 175 were submitted by organizations or individuals in their institutional capacity. Of this latter group, industry (including trade associations) accounted for approximately 48%, nonprofit advocacy for approximately 37%, and academic and other research organizations for approximately 15%. There were a few comments from elected and other governmental officials.

Multiple policy interventions may be necessary to achieve accountability. Take, for example, a policy promoting the disclosure to appropriate parties of training data details, performance limitations, and model characteristics for high-risk AI systems. Disclosure alone does not make an AI actor accountable. However, such information flows will likely be important for internal accountability within the AI actor’s domain and for external accountability as regulators, litigators, courts, and the public act on such information. Disclosure, then, is an accountability input whose effectiveness depends on other policies or conditions, such as the governing liability framework, relevant regulation, and market forces (in particular, customers’ and consumers’ ability to use the information disclosed to make purchase and use decisions). This report touches on how accountability inputs feed into the larger accountability apparatus and considers how these connections might be developed in further work.

Auditors should adhere to consensus standards and audit criteria where possible, recognizing that some will be specific to particular risks (e.g., dangerous capabilities in a foundation model) and/or particular deployment contexts (e.g., discriminatory impact in hiring). Much work is required to create those standards – which NIST and others are undertaking. Audits and other evaluations are being rolled out now concurrently with the development of technical standards. Especially where evaluators are not yet relying on consensus standards, it is important that they show their work so that they too are subject to evaluation. Auditors should disclose methodological choices and auditor independence criteria, with the goal of standardizing such methods and criteria as appropriate. The goals of safeguarding sensitive information and ensuring auditor independence and appropriate expertise may militate towards a certification process for qualified auditors.

Stakeholders seek clarification of liability standards for allocating responsibility among AI actors in the value chain. We expect AI liability standards to emerge out of the courts as legal actions which clarify responsibilities and redress harms. Regulatory agencies also have an important role in determining how existing laws and regulations apply to AI systems. Of course, Congress and state legislatures will define new liability contours. To help clarify and establish standards for liability, where needed, we encourage further study and collection of stakeholder and government agency input.

There are strong arguments for sectoral regulation of AI systems in the United States and as for mandatory audits of AI systems deemed to present a high risk of harming rights or safety – according to holistic assessments tailored to deployment and use contexts. Given these arguments, work needs to be done to implement regulatory requirements for audits in some situations. It may not currently be feasible to require audits for all high-risk AI systems because the ecosystem for AI audits is still immature; requirements may need delayed implementation. However, the ecosystem’s maturity will be accelerated by forcing functions. Government may also need to require other forms of information creation and distribution, including documentation and disclosure, in specific sectors and deployment contexts (beyond what it already does require).

In the 118th Congress, as of June 2023, at least 40 bills had been introduced that either focused on AI/ML or contained AI/ML-focused provisions, and none has been enacted. Collectively, bills in the 118th Congress address a range of topics, including federal government oversight of AI; training for federal employees; disclosure of AI use; export controls; use-specific prohibitions; and support for the use of AI in particular sectors, such as cybersecurity, weather modeling, wildfire detection, precision agriculture, and airport safety.
